 words used for interest, tokos and ms respectively, meant “to give birth”. In these cultures, interest indicated a valuable increase, and seemed to consider it from the lender's point of view. The Code of Hammurabi (1792-1750 BC) included laws governing banking operations. The Babylonians were accustomed to charging interest at the rate of 20 percent per annum.

Jews were not allowed to take interest from other Jews, but they were allowed to take interest from Gentiles, who had at that time no law forbidding them from practicing usury. As Gentiles took interest from Jews, the Torah considered it equitable that Jews should take interest from Gentiles. In Hebrew, interest is neshek.

By 1200 BC, cowrie shells were used as a form of money in China. By 640 BC, the Lydians had started to use coin money. Lydia was the first place where permanent retail shops opened. (Herodotus mentions the use of crude coins in Lydia in an earlier date, around 687 BC.)

The use of coins as a means of representing money began in the years between 600 and 570 BCE. Cities under the Greek empire, such as Aegina (595 BCE), Athens (575 BCE), and Corinth (570 BCE), started to mint their own coins. In the Roman Republic, interest was outlawed altogether by the Lex Genucia reforms. Under Julius Caesar, a ceiling on interest rates of 12% was set, and later under Justinian it was lowered even further to between 4% and 8%.[citation needed]

Economics focuses on the behaviour and interactions of economic agents and how economies work. Microeconomics is a field which analyzes what's viewed as basic elements in the economy, including individual agents and markets, their interactions, and the outcomes of interactions. Individual agents may include, for example, households, firms, buyers, and sellers. Macroeconomics analyzes the economy as a system where production, consumption, saving, and investment interact, and factors affecting it: employment of the resources of labour, capital, and land, currency inflation, economic growth, and public policies that have impact on these elements.

Other broad distinctions within economics include those between positive economics, describing "what is", and normative economics, advocating "what ought to be"; between economic theory and applied economics; between rational and behavioural economics; and between mainstream economics and heterodox economics.

Economic analysis can be applied throughout society, including real estate, business, finance, health care, engineering and government. It is also applied to such diverse subjects as crime, education, the family, feminism, law, philosophy, politics, religion, social institutions, war, science, and the environment.


Contents
1	Definitions of economics over time
2	History of economic thought
2.1	From antiquity through the physiocrats
2.2	Classical political economy
2.3	Marxian economics
2.4	Neoclassical economics
2.5	Keynesian economics
2.6	Chicago school of economics
2.7	Austrian School of Economics
2.8	Other schools and approaches
3	Methodology
3.1	Theoretical research
3.2	Empirical research
4	Branches of economics
4.1	Microeconomics
4.1.1	Production, cost, and efficiency
4.1.2	Specialization
4.1.3	Supply and demand
4.1.4	Firms
4.1.5	Uncertainty and game theory
4.1.6	Market failure
4.1.7	Welfare
4.2	Macroeconomics
4.2.1	Growth
4.2.2	Business cycle
4.2.3	Unemployment
4.2.4	Inflation and monetary policy
4.2.5	Fiscal policy
4.3	Public economics
4.4	International economics
4.5	Labor economics
4.6	Development economics
5	Criticisms
5.1	General criticisms
5.2	Criticisms of assumptions
6	Related subjects
7	Profession
8	See also
8.1	General
9	Notes
10	References
11	Further reading
12	External links
12.1	General information
12.2	Institutions and organizations
12.3	Study resources
Definitions of economics over time

The earlier term for the discipline was 'political economy'.Since the late 19th century, it has commonly been called 'economics'.[citation needed], cited to the Ancient Greek οἰκονομικός (oikonomikos), "practiced in the management of a household or family" and therefore "frugal, thrifty", which in turn comes from οἰκονομία (oikonomia) "household management" which in turn comes from οἶκος (oikos "house") and νόμος (nomos, "custom" or "law").}}

There are a variety of modern definitions of economics; some reflect evolving views of the subject or different views among economists. Scottish philosopher Adam Smith (1776) defined what was then called political economy as "an inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations", in particular as:

a branch of the science of a statesman or legislator [with the twofold